Graph DFS/BFS Problem Set (#52)
Ada-Developers-Academy/ada-CS-Fundamentals-Internship: 08-graphs/02-graphs-algorithms.md

> We do so by adding each of the neighbors of the starting node to a Queue and then loop through the Queue removing an element and repeating the process with the neighbors of the current node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do so by adding each of the neighbors of the starting node to a queue. Then we loop through the queue, removing the first element in the queue and adding each of its unvisited neighbors to the queue. We repeat this process until the queue is empty. 

Once the queue is empty we know we have visited all nodes in the graph that are possible to reach from the starting node.

Reviewer: I think it may be helpful to have a video walkthrough of what walking through this 'pseudocode' looks like with an example graph before asking them to implement.

### !challenge

* type: code-snippet
* language: python3.6
* id: 3398d942-7078-4567-9b81-67bb6c38d104
* title: Iterative Breadth First Search
* points: 1

##### !question

Write a function returning a list of elements representing a breadth first search of the items in `self.adjacency_dict`.

##### !end-question

##### !placeholder

```py
class Graph:
    
    # The graph is stored in an adjacency dictionary where each key 

>     # represents an item in the graph and each value in the dictionary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # represents a node in the graph and each value in the dictionary
```

>     # corresponds to a list of edges from the key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # represents the corresponding key's list of edges
```

    def __init__(self, adjacency_dict = {}):
        self.adjacency_dict = adjacency_dict

    def bfs(self):
        pass
```

##### !end-placeholder

##### !tests
```py
import unittest
from main import *

class TestPython1(unittest.TestCase):
    def test_bfs(self):
        adjacency_dict = {
            "Seattle": ["Portland", "Chicago"],
            "Chicago": ["Seattle"],
            "Portland": ["Seattle", "Hawaii"],
            "Hawaii": ["Portland"]
        }

        g = Graph(adjacency_dict)

        answer = ["Seattle", "Portland", "Chicago", "Hawaii"]
        self.assertEqual(answer, g.bfs())

    def test_bfs_empty_graph(self):
        g = Graph()
        self.assertEqual([], g.bfs())

    def test_bfs_one_item(self):
        adjacency_dict = {
            "Seattle": []
        }
        g = Graph(adjacency_dict)

>         self.assertEqual(["Seattle"], g.dfs())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        self.assertEqual(["Seattle"], g.bfs())
```

##### !end-answer

##### !explanation

> Since you will visit each node once, and loop through each of the edges in each node the Big-O of this algorithm is O(N + E) where `N` is the number of nodes in the graph and `E` is the number of edges since each node and each edge will be explored.

Reviewer: It might be nice to include a more in depth explanation about why O(N+E) is different than O(N*E) or O(N^2) which I've seen as other common responses.

Similarly, we might consider adding O(N^2) as a possible answer

> Where breadth-first-search spreads out from a starting node in order of distance from the starting node, depth first search follows each path as far as possible before backing up and following the next closest path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where breadth-first-search spreads out from a starting node in order of distance from the starting node, depth-first-search follows each path as far as possible before backing up and following the next closest path.
```

> [HackerEarth](https://www.hackerearth.com/practice/algorithms/graphs/depth-first-search/visualize/) has an excellent description and visualization of the algorithm.

Reviewer: Similar to BFS, we may consider adding a video here to illustrate how depth first search works when looking at a diagram rather than relying on hacker earth. I would also explicitly call out that because we want to follow each path as far as we can, the algorithm lends itself to using a stack instead of a queue (LIFO v FIFO).

```

##### !end-tests

### !hint
**Pseudocode**

1. Start by grabbing the first item in the adjacency dictionary `start_node`
1. Create a Stack called `stack`
1. Create an empty list called `visited`
1. Push `start_node` onto `stack`
1. while `stack` is not empty
    1. Pop the stack and store it in `current`
    1. Add `current` to `visited`
    1. Loop through all the neighbors of `current`
        1. If they are not in `visited`
            1. Push the neighbor onto `stack`
1. Return `visited`
<br>
Still feeling stuck? Check this video walkthrough of the solution.

<!-- Insert link to video explanation here -->

### !end-hint 

### !explanation
An example of a working implementation:

```python
def dfs(self):
    graph = self.adjacency_dict
    
    if len(graph) == 0:
        return []
        
    first_item = list(graph.keys())[0]
    stack = [first_item]
    visited = []

    while stack:
        current = stack.pop()
        visited.append(current)

        for neighbor in graph[current]:
            if neighbor not in visited:
                stack.append(neighbor)

    return visited
```
### !end-explanation

### !end-challenge

> 

Reviewer: Before asking this question, consider adding in an observation that when we see a stack data structure being used (as well as we are doing the same operation over and over on different subgraphs) we may think about using recursion.

        g = Graph()
        self.assertEqual([], g.dfs())

    def test_dfs_one_item(self):
        adjacency_dict = {
            "Seattle": []
        }
        g = Graph(adjacency_dict)
        self.assertEqual(["Seattle"], g.dfs())
```

##### !end-tests

##### !hint
**Pseudocode**
1. For base function:
    1. Create empty list called `visited`
    1. Grab the first item in the adjacency graph `first_item`
    1. Call helper function with `visited`, `self.adjacency_dict`, and `first_item`
    1. Return `visited`

1. For helper function (takes in `visited`, `graph`, and `node`):
    1. If `node` is not in `visited`:
        1. Append `node` to `visited`
        1. For each `neighbor` of the `node`:
            1. Call helper with `visited`, `graph`, and the `neighbor`
<br>
What we're essentially doing here is replacing the explicit creation of a stack and taking advantage of the recursive call stack.

##### !end-hint 

##### !explanation
An example of a working implementation:

```python
def dfs_helper(self, visited, graph, node):
    if node not in visited:
        visited.append(node)
        for neighbor in graph[node]:
            self.dfs_helper(visited, graph, neighbor)

> def dfs_recursive(self):

Reviewer: Change solution function name to match challenge function stub
```suggestion
def dfs(self):
```

### Depth-First-Search

> Where breadth-first-search spreads out from a starting node in order of distance from the starting node, depth-first-search follows each path as far as possible before backing up and following the next closest path.

Reviewer: I don't think we explain what backtracking is before the summary. 

```suggestion
Where breadth-first-search spreads out from a starting node in order of distance from the starting node, depth-first-search follows each path as far as possible before backing up and following the next closest path. For this reason we refer to depth-first-search as a _backtracking_ algorithm.
```

Here are some other facts about graphs:
- A graph can have both unweighted and weighted edges.  In a weighted graph, each connection is assigned a cost or weight. 
- A graph can be directed or undirected.  In a directed graph an edge is *not* bidirectional.  

There are a few main ways to represent a graph:
1. Using an adjacency dictionary, which represents the nodes as keys and the edges are represented in a list as the value of the key. This method has an O(1) time complexity to look up the neighbors of the node. We used this representation in the challenges above.
1. Using an adjacency matrix which is a 2-dimensional array where each entry represents an edge between the nodes indicated by it's row and column indices.  An adjacency matrix is very quick to lookup a connection between two nodes.  On the other hand retrieving a list of all the edges a node has has a time complexity of O(N) where `N` is the number of nodes.  It also require O(N<sup>2</sup>) space complexity.  

> 1. Another method of representing a graph involves an adjacency list, which is an array of lists of neighbors.  This method has an O(1) time complexity to look up all the neighbors of a node, but O(d) to lookup a particular connection where `d` is the degree of the node, or the number of neighbors it has.  It also requires less space complexity.

Reviewer: I really like these explanations, but I would consider moving them to the overview lesson as it matches the content of that lesson more closely. 

Here I might consider going more in depth about why BFS and DFS lend themselves to queues v stacks respectively and situations in which we might we might use each or choose one over the other, especially given they have the same Big O.

<!-- ======================= END CHALLENGE ======================= -->

## Summary

> Two popular graph traversal algorithms are breadth-first-search (BFS) and depth-first-search (DFS). Both algorithms will visit each node and edge in the graph, but they have different methods of performing the traversal. The difference determines which is better suited for specific purposes. 

Reviewer: Altering this to make it clear that it a lot of cases, both will work.
```suggestion
Two popular graph traversal algorithms are breadth-first-search (BFS) and depth-first-search (DFS). Both algorithms will visit each node and edge in the graph, but they have different methods of performing the traversal. In most cases, both BFS and DFS can be used to solve a problem. However, there are instances in which the differences in approach make one a better choice than the other. The most common use cases for each are listed below. 
```

Breadth-first-search processes nodes by visiting all neighboring nodes before moving on to nodes that are neighbors of its neighbors and so-on.
Depth-first-search processes nodes by following a path as deep as it can before backing up and following another path.

> **Breadth-first-search**|**Depth-first-search**|

Reviewer: 🌟 Really like adding these as tables!
